# Low Precision Fortran (LPF)

Low Precision Float types in Fortran.

Version: 0.1.0

DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.20442279

Copyright 2026 by Martin Köhler

## Usage

Since Fortran does not provide and interface to low precision float types, like
fp16 or bfloat16. This library implements both on top of an int16 datatype, such
that they become interoperable between C and Fortran via a reinterpretation of
the pointers. Furthermore, it uses Fortran 2008 features to provide an easy to
use interface on the Fortran side. By defining a type
```fortran
 use lpf_fp16
 type(FP16) :: x
```
and using it like any other `REAL` variable, `fp16` can be used in Fortran.
Analogously, the `bf16` support can be used via
```fortran
 use lpf_bf16
 type(BF16) :: y
```
Support for FP8 is provided via `E4M3` and `E5M2` formats:
```fortran
 use lpf_fp8_e4m3
 type(FP8_E4M3) :: x_e4m3
```
and
```fortran
 use lpf_fp8_e5m2
 type(FP8_E5M2) :: y_e5m2
```
Both work like any other numerical type, but with one difference: If they are
involved in an computation with `INTEGER` or `REAL(real32)` datatypes, the
whole computation is performed in low precision.

Since Fortran does not support user-defined type literals, the low precision
type are generated by assignment or
```fortran
x = 1.0E0
x = FP16(1.0D0)
y = BF16(1.0D0)
x_e4m3 = FP8_E4M3(1.0D0)
y_e5m2 = FP8_E5M2(1.0D0)
```

Converting back is possible using assignment or the type-cast function `real` or
`dble`:
```fortran
type(fp16) :: x
real :: xr
double precision :: xd

xr = real(x)
xd = dble(x)
```
An implicit upcast to `real` or `double precision` is not allowed. This must be
done manually by call `real` or `dble`. The `kind` parameter in the `real` call
is not supported, since this must be a compile-time constant, which could not be
evaluated by an overloaded function.

>>> [!caution] Precision Leak
In order to avoid precision leaks during the usage of Low Precision Fortran,
there is a difference to other way low precision aroithmetic is implemented in
other programming languages:

**Every operation, where at least one operand is of a low precision type, is
performed in the low precision.**

This is necessary to get expressions like ` x + 1.0` working without storing the
`1.0` in a variable before. If you want this operation to be performed in
`real32`, one have to use `real(x) + 1.0`.

>>>


### IO

The datatypes only support the formatted output with `WRITE` and `PRINT`
statements. If used in `FORMAT` statements, the `DT(W,P)` identifier can be
used, where `W` indicates the width of the overall number and `P` the precision.
Alternatively, the scientific notation can be used by `DT"E"(W,P)`. In pratice,
this looks like:
```fortran
type(fp16) :: x
x = 3.14
write(*, '(DT"E"(10,4))') x
```

### Math-Function

The low precision datatypes support all standard Fortran Math functions.
- **Core Arithmetic**: Support for `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, and `**`.
- **Math Functions**: Comprehensive support for single-argument functions (`abs`, `sin`, `cos`, `exp`, `log`, `sqrt`, etc.), two-argument functions (`atan2`, `hypot`), and specialized trigonometric functions.
- **Array Reductions**: Support for `maxval`, `minval`, `maxloc`, and `minloc`.

For `fp16` and `bf16`, these functions currently use their `REAL(real32)` counterpart with typecasts and the implementation from libm instead of the ones from the Fortran compilers. FP8 operations are implemented via emulation and lookup tables for efficiency.

### ToDo

* Support for unformatted IO
* AXV512FP16 and emulation support at once, but dispatching causes an overhead.

### Issue / Missing Functionallity

#### MAXLOC/MAXVAL/MINVAL/MINLOC
The family of `maxloc`, `maxval`, `minval`, and `minloc` only support up to 4D
arrays. The optional `MASK` argument in `maxval` and `minval` is not yet supported.
The `maxloc` and `minloc` function does not support the `mask`, `kind`, and
`back` argument, yet.

#### MIN/MAX
The `min` and `max` function involving fp16 or bf16 datatypes supports up to
three inputs at the moment.

#### AMD AOCC

The AMD AOCC compiler does not support the overloading of the `write` interface
in a complete private environment and making the function public afterwards.
For this reason, we do not support the AMD compiler suite.

## Installation

The library currently works with gcc compilers supporting the `_Float16`
datatype and the `-mf16c` switch (starting with GCC 11). For proper hardware
support of `fp16`, a CPU with `AVX512FP16` is required.

FP8 support is implemented via emulation and lookup tables, and therefore does not require specific hardware flags for basic functionality.

### Building
The build process is controlled via the following CMake options:

| Option | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `LPF_DEBUG` | `OFF` | Enable Debug Symbol generation |
| `LPF_NATIVE` | `OFF` | Enable Native Build |
| `LPF_BLAS` | `ON` | Enable BLAS and LAPACK |
| `LPF_INTEGER8` | `OFF` | Build Fortran integer of size 8 |
| `LPF_FP8_E4M3` | `ON` | Support for FP8_E4M3 |
| `LPF_FP8_E5M2` | `ON` | Support for FP8_E5M2 |
| `LPF_EXAMPLES_TLAPACK` | `OFF` | Build TLAPACK examples |
| `LPF_TESTING` | `ON` | Build the LPF example programs and tests |
| `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` | `Release` | Choose the type of build (e.g., Debug, Release) |

```shell
cmake -S . -B build-dir -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=INSTALL-LOCATION
cmake --build build-dir
cmake --build build-dir --target install
```

### Native fp16/bf16 support

Some CPUs, like Intel Xeons out of the Sapphire rappids series or Apple Silicon
chips have (partial) support in hardware. By specifying the proper C flags,
these can be used:

#### x86-64
This requires the `AVX512FP16` and/or the `AXV512BF16` capability. This can be
checked using
```shell
lscpu | grep -o -E '(axv512_fp16|avx512_bf16)'
```
Depending on which features are available, the corresponding compiler switches
can be added;
```shell
-DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-mavx512fp16 -mavx512bf16"
```
### AArch64 and Apple Silicon
In case of an fp16 or bf16 aware AArch64 CPU, the compiler flags will be
```shell
-DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-march=armv8.4-a+fp16+bf16"
```

Alternatively, one can add
```shell
-DLPF_NATIVE=ON
```
to the `cmake` command line in order to try the cpu-native compilation, if
supported by the target.


### Usage in other projects

The project can either be used as subproject or integrated using CMake's
`FetchContent` mechanism.


## License

The library is licensed under GNU LGPL 3 or any later version if you want. See LICENSE for
details.
